-The theme of President Trump's
State of the Union address
was supposed to be unity, and
in the lead-up to the speech,
Trump honored that theme
by attacking Democrats.
For more on this,
it's time for "A Closer Look."
♪♪
Remember, this speech
was supposed to be last week,
but it was postponed due
to the government shutdown.
And as he prepared
for tonight's address,
Trump was once again
threatening the possibility
of a second shutdown
when government funding
runs out on February 15th.
Trump still wants Democrats
to give him money
for his border wall,
even though public opinion
is still firmly against him.
And that's because
he just keeps saying
the same things over and over.
Eventually people are
just going to tune you out.
Sure, the first time you see a
crazy guy yelling on the subway,
you move down
to the other end of the car.
But the 10th time you see one,
you just put your headphones in
and listen to a podcast about
America's mental-health crisis.
For example -- For example,
here's Trump yet again
repeating his claim
that previous presidents
should have built a wall
on the Southern border.
-We're going to strengthen up
our Southern border.
That should have been done
30 years ago,
40 years ago, 20 years ago,
10 years ago, 5 years ago.
-Those are all the numbers
he knows.
And you know...
[ Cheers and applause ]
You know he just threw in
"5 years ago"
because he wasn't quite sure
if Obama was president
10 years ago.
Also, if anyone should be happy
a previous president
didn't build a wall,
it should be you.
If there was already a wall,
what would people have chanted
at your rallies?
"Maintain the previously
erected wall"?
"Obama built the wall,
but I'm going to keep it clean
because it was filthy
under Obama.
A filthy, filthy,
embarrassing wall.
Oh, we're going clean it.
Oh, we're going to clean it.
[ Cheers and applause ]
Oh, you're going -- You're
going to eat off the wall."
Now, in his speech tonight,
Trump claimed
he was interested
in bipartisan compromise,
and even though he caved
on the shutdown last month
without getting any money
for his wall,
his allies on Fox News
have been pretending
it was actually a major victory.
-He did not cave!
He made a tactical decision,
a strategy decision
to pick the ground to fight on.
-Anyone out there, by the way,
thinking President Trump
caved today,
you don't really know
the Donald Trump I know.
He right now
holds all the cards.
-That's right.
Trump holds all the cards.
Except he's holding them
facing out and upside down,
and they're Monopoly cards.
[ Laughter and applause ]
"They are not Monopoly cards!"
[ Laughter ]
She screams, "He did not cave,"
like she's in a cave.
[ Laughter ]
In his speech
to Congress tonight,
Trump also repeated his claim
that a border wall
would stop crime and drugs
from pouring into the country,
despite the fact that
immigrants commit crimes
at a lower rate
than native-born Americans,
and most illegal drugs
come through ports of entry.
Trump's been making
that same argument for years,
and polls show most Americans
still aren't buying it.
That's why in the run-up
to his speech tonight,
Trump started making
a new, dumber argument --
walls work because
cars have wheels.
And what's even more insane
is that Republican senators
like Ted Cruz have actually
been repeating that argument.
-They say a wall is medieval.
Well, so is a wheel.
A wheel is older than a wall,
and I looked at
every single car out there,
even the really expensive ones
that the Secret Service uses --
And believe me.
They are expensive.
I said, "Do they all
have wheels? Yes.
Oh, I thought it was medieval."
-You know, the President
has a good observation.
He said, "I'll tell you
something else that's medieval.
The wheel."
There's a reason
the wheel is medieval,
'cause it rolls things
and it works.
Walls are effective.
-You know what's medieval?
That beard.
[ Laughter ]
You look...
[ Cheers and applause ]
You look like you're
about to arrest Robin Hood.
Now, that argument was so dumb,
even Trump knew better
than to include it
in his speech tonight.
Instead, the theme of tonight's
speech was supposed to be unity,
even with the specter of
a second government shutdown
looming over the whole affair,
which is why coming in to
tonight, everyone was very eager
to see the dynamic between Trump
and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi,
who would be sitting behind
Trump for the first time.
Remember, for the last two
State of the Union speeches,
Trump had
Vice President Mike Pence
and House Speaker Paul Ryan
behind him,
standing and cheering
for everything he said
like Southern pageant moms.
"Yes, Kaley!
You are servin' looks tonight!
Ka-ley!"
And there's a long history
of the people
sitting behind the President
getting just as much attention
during the State of the Union
as the President himself.
Just look at former
House Speaker John Boehner,
who always glared at Obama
like a supervillain
plotting his revenge.
Or former Vice President
Joe Biden who always...
[ Laughter ]
...who always looked like
he was going room to room
at a house party, making sure
everyone had enough booze.
"You good, Chad?
How about you, Rick?
I'm making margs.
Another marg, Chad?
One more for you?
Maybe just one big one,
two straws?
[ Laughter ]
Gonna do a cannonball later.
You guys might want
to come out to the pool."
And the Trump/Pelosi dynamic --
The dynamic is going to be
especially fascinating to watch,
given just how overmatched Trump
has been in his negotiations
with her
over the last few weeks.
Over the weekend, Trump told CBS
he couldn't get a deal done
with Pelosi
because she wouldn't budge
on anything.
-You had quite the showdown
with Speaker Pelosi.
What did you learn
about negotiating with her?
-Well, I think
that she was very rigid.
-Yeah, of course, she's rigid.
It's a negotiation.
This guy wrote
"The Art of the Deal,"
and he has no idea
how a deal works.
"I got to be honest.
I feel like she and I
want different things."
[ Laughter ]
Trump was insistent
as recently as last week
that he would get
the better of Pelosi,
and he was confident
that he'd get his wall.
Let's see how he felt about
the status of the wall today
just hours
before his big speech.
-President Trump tweeted this.
"Tremendous numbers of people
are coming up through Mexico
in the hopes of flooding
our Southern border.
We have sent
additional military.
We will build a human wall
if necessary."
-A human wall?
He negotiated himself down
from a concrete wall
to a steel barrier to a fence
to a human wall.
Who are the humans
in the wall anyway?
Are you and your weird sons
going to go down to the border
and play red rover?
"Red rover, red rover.
Send immigrants over."
And there are all kind of
State of the Union traditions
most people don't know about.
For example, every year, there's
one administration official
appointed as
a designated survivor
who stays in a separate location
in case disaster strikes,
and tonight
that designated survivor
was Energy Secretary Rick Perry.
Can you imagine hearing the news
that the Capitol
had been blown up
and everyone had been killed
and then hearing
the newscaster say,
"And so now we go live
for an address
from President Rick Perry"?
I mean, at least
we know what he'd say.
-Oops.
-And, in fact, before
Trump's speech even started,
we already had
one big "oops" moment --
Trump's weirdly crooked tie.
Look at that. Trump --
Trump is so unpopular, even his
tie has moved to the left.
[ Cheers and applause ]
Now, understanding what Trump
is saying at any given moment
can be difficult
for casual observers,
let alone
professional politicians
who are used to normal
human syntax,
which might explain why
at one point Nancy Pelosi
seemed to be reading along with
a printed copy of the speech.
She looks like a babysitter
reading the rules
of the board game
while the kids are just chucking
game pieces at each other.
She looks like she's
checking the playbill
to see who the understudy is.
"Ohh! Oh, it's Alec Baldwin."
[ Laughter ]
But this was the first time --
This is the first time
we got to see in real time
the two different reactions
of Pence on the one hand
and Pelosi on the other,
and it was very revealing.
As he repeated
the same talking points
he often repeats
at every speech,
Pence applauded enthusiastically
while Pelosi was
much more muted.
-African-American,
Hispanic-American,
and Asian-American unemployment
have all reached
their lowest levels
ever recorded.
[ Applause ]
-Look at them.
Pence is like a dad
who's proud that his kid
keyed the principal's car,
and Pelosi's like a mom
who's thinking to herself,
"I wish I had a daughter."
But the reactions were most
telling when Trump alluded
to the many investigations
of his presidency,
including investigations
and oversight
being conducted
by Democrats in Congress
and implied
that those investigations
were somehow
hurting the economy.
-An economic miracle is taking
place in the United States,
and the only thing
that can stop it
are foolish wars, politics,
or ridiculous
partisan investigations.
[ Applause ]
If there is going to be
peace and legislation,
there cannot be
war and investigation.
It just doesn't work that way.
-I'm sorry.
You think the investigations
are hurting the economy?
If anything, you've created
thousands of jobs for lawyers.
This is such an insane argument.
He's like a guy who gets
pulled over for drunk driving
and says, "Officer,
I can't focus on the road
with a breathalyzer
in my mouth."
And eventually
Trump got to the central promise
of his campaign and presidency,
the thing he shut down
the government over -- his wall.
And despite all
the contradictory messages
he's sent over
the past several weeks,
Trump insisted that he would
definitely get that wall.
-My administration
has sent to Congress
a common-sense proposal
to end the crisis
on the Southern border.
In the past, most of the people
in this room voted for a wall.
But the proper wall
never got built.
I will get it built.
-Oh, you're gonna get it built?
You went from promising
it would be a concrete wall
to saying it would be
a human wall. What's next?
"Walls work, and so do wheels,
and that's why the wall
will be built out of wheels.
Oh, no! Oh, no! The wall's
rolling into the ocean!
Oh, wheel wall!
Oh, why?!
[ Cheers and applause ]
Goodbye, wheel wall!
I love you, wheel wall!"
Trump then moved on
to the economy,
and when he mentioned
the percentage of new jobs
occupied by women, the record
number of female freshmen
Democrats in the audience
started dancing
like the cool aunts
at a wedding.
Trump then had the audacity
to note the fact that more women
were serving in Congress
than ever before,
as if he had something
to do with it.
-We also have more women
serving in Congress
than at any time before.
[ Cheers and applause ]
-Look at Pelosi letting everyone
know where those women are.
Also, I love that Trump thinks
he can take credit for that.
"The only reason
they got elected
is that most people hate me.
You're welcome, everyone."
In fact, a wave of Democrats was
elected to Congress in November,
running in part on
a progressive economic agenda,
with some,
like Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez,
openly embracing the label
of Democratic socialist.
Democrats also ran in part
against Trump's
deeply unpopular tax cut
for corporations
and the wealthy,
and polls have shown support
for policies like a wealth tax
or a higher income tax for
the richest Americans surging,
even among Republicans.
So Trump decided to take a swipe
at the Democratic socialists
in the room.
-Here in the United States,
we are alarmed by the new calls
to adopt socialism
in our country.
[ Scattered boos ]
America was founded on
liberty and independence
and not government coercion,
domination, and control.
We are born free,
and we will stay free.
[ Cheers and applause ]
-Look at Bernie's face.
That's the face he makes
when the waiter catches him
stuffing sugar packets
in his pocket.
"All the sugar packets
are being hoarded
by the millionaires
and billionaires!
Sugar to the people!"
We've been here
many times before.
We all know the real Trump
is the one
who will reappear
on Twitter tomorrow.
In his speech tonight,
he attacked
the investigations
of his presidency
and repeated his demand
for a border wall.
He just recycled
many of the same talking points
he always uses.
In other words, he went
'round and 'round like...
-A wheel.
-This has been "A Closer Look."
[ Cheers and applause ]